doc: Documents testing best practices (#2132)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: contributing/testing-best-practices.md

> # Testing Best Practices

Reviewer: comment for the different sections so leaving it here. Can you add examples to our current tests when describing the guidelines? You can even pick a resource and always refer to it

Author: do you mean for instance when describing variable MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID, function ProjectIDExecution, etc. to link to some part in the code?

if that's the case I'm not sure I would do that because it's easy that links to code get outdated when we change the code/tests.

I think it's better that people just search for words like MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID in the code to see how it can be used.

Reviewer: I left a couple of cases below of where to leave an example.

> it's easy that links to code get outdated when we change the code/tests.
Not properly, you can make a link to a file by fixing the commit. Also if an example ever gets outdated it means also the guideline is outdated, so it doesn't really create an extra effort.

Rationale is to think: how can I speed up my team to implement the right practices and "see" what I mean?

Author: adding examples

## Types of test

> - Unit tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to tests that [validate a resource schema](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/handling-data/schemas#unit-testing). That is done automatically [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/provider/provider_test.go) for all resources and data sources using Terraform Framework Plugin. Here we’re referring to the broader concept of testing a resource or unit without calling the external systems like the Atlas Go SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Unit tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to tests that [validate a resource schema](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/handling-data/schemas#unit-testing). That is done automatically [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/provider/provider_test.go) for all resources and data sources using Terraform Framework Plugin. Additionally, we have general unit testing for testing a resource or unit without calling the external systems like the Atlas Go SDK.
```

> - Acceptance (acc) tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to the use of real Terraform configurations to exercise the code in plan, apply, refresh, and destroy life cycles (real infrastructure resources are created as part of the test).

Reviewer: link here?

Author: added, thx

> - Migration (mig) tests: These tests are designed to ensure that after an upgrade to a new Atlas provider version, user configs do not result in unexpected plan changes. Migration tests are a subset of Acceptance tests.

Reviewer: also here

Author: added, thx

## File structure

> - Unit and Acceptances tests are in the same `_test.go` file. They are not in the same package as the code tests, e.g. `advancedcluster` tests are in `advancedcluster_test` package so coupling is minimized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Acceptances tests are in corresponding `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.
- General unit tests are in corresponding  `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.  If business logic is extracted into a separate file, unit testing for that logic will be including in its associated `_test.go` file (e.g. [state_transition_search_deployment_test.go](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/searchdeployment/state_transition_search_deployment_test.go)).
- Tests are not in the same package as the code it tests, e.g. `advancedcluster` tests are in `advancedcluster_test` package so coupling is minimized.
```

Would be worth clarifying since the majority of our unit testing is model conversions.

- Migration tests are in `_migration_test.go` files.

> - All resources need a `main_test.go` file to handle resource reuse lifecycle, e.g. [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/advancedcluster/main_test.go).

Reviewer: is it more like a package rather than resource? it's worth it to clarify the relation between the package and the resource

Author: clarification added, thx

> - All resources need a `main_test.go` file to handle resource reuse lifecycle, e.g. [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/advancedcluster/main_test.go).

Reviewer: nit: suggest to stick to the **must** and **should**

Author: changed, thx

- Helper methods must have their own tests, e.g. `common_advanced_cluster_test.go` has tests for `common_advanced_cluster.go`.
- `internal/testutils/acc` contains helper test functions for Acceptance tests.
- `internal/testutils/mig` contains helper test functions specifically for Migration tests.
- `internal/testutils/replay` contains helper test functions for [Hoverfly](https://docs.hoverfly.io/en/latest/). Hoverfly is used to capture and replay HTTP traffic with Atlas Cloud to speed up local development process.

## Local development

> - Many tests support use of environment variables `MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID` and `MONGODB_ATLAS_CLUSTER_NAME` to resuse an exisiting project or cluster when runnning tests. This significantly reduces run duration for those tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Many tests support use of environment variables `MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID` and `MONGODB_ATLAS_CLUSTER_NAME` to re-use an exisiting project or cluster when runnning tests. This significantly reduces run duration for those tests.
```

> - Many tests support use of environment variables `MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID` and `MONGODB_ATLAS_CLUSTER_NAME` to resuse an exisiting project or cluster when runnning tests. This significantly reduces run duration for those tests.

Reviewer 4: Maybe a table would be nice here, then it would be easier to add more in the future

EnvVar | Description
--- | ---
MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID |  re-use an existing project
MONGODB_ATLAS_CLUSTER_NAME |  re-use an existing cluster
REPLAY_MODE | ...

Author: table added, thx!

- Go test cache can be used without any special setup.
- Some tests support [Hoverfly](https://docs.hoverfly.io/en/latest/).

## Unit tests

- Unit tests must not create Terraform resources or use external systems like [Atlas Go SDK](https://github.com/mongodb/atlas-sdk-go).
- [Testify Mock](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/mock) is used for test doubles.

> - Altlas Go SDK mocked interfaces are generated in [mockadmin](https://github.com/mongodb/atlas-sdk-go/tree/main/mockadmin) package using [Mockery](https://github.com/vektra/mockery).

Reviewer 4: Maybe worth mentioning that we prefer using a specific part of the atlas admin client, e.g., `client.ProjectsApi`

Author: added, thx

## Acceptance tests

- There must be at least one `basic acceptance test` for each resource

> - `Basic import tests` are done as the last step in the `basic acceptance tests`, not as a different test. Exceptions apply for more specific import tests, e.g. testing with incorrect IDs.

Reviewer: `import` needs a definition above, it's very confusing to read this if you don't have context.

This is a perfect case where an example clarifies a lot as well (see my comment above)

Author: definition added

> - Data sources are tested in the same tests as the resources. There are not specific test files or tests for data sources as a resource must typically be created. (There are very few exceptions to this, e.g. when there is only data sources but not resource)

Reviewer: add example.
```suggestion
- Data sources are tested in the same tests as the resources. There are no separate test files or tests for data sources as a resource must typically be created. (There are very few exceptions to this, e.g. when there is only data sources but not resource)
```

Author: similar comment to above.  if we have links to specific parts of the code/test i think it's easy that they get outdated. or maybe I could just reference the file not specific lines

Reviewer: I believe you can use permalink, e.g. https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/66c44e62c9afe04ffe8be0dbccaec682bab830e6/internal/service/advancedcluster/model_advanced_cluster_test.go#L24 -- this link will always refer to the same line, even when the file evolves because it points to a specific commit

Author: yes, but that would be a link to a previous version of the file that might differ significantly from the current file. Maybe the specific line(s) are ok but the rest of the file might have content that is outdated and got improvements in the latest version.  user might be confused to think that the whole file (not only the highlighted lines) has the latest best-practices. file might not even exist anymore

Author: adding examples

> - Main way to reduce use of projects is `ProjectIDExecution`. This function returns the ID of a project that is created for the current execution of tests for a resource.

Reviewer: this and the next point on cluster should be mentioned in a sub-heading under acceptance test

## Acceptance tests
...
### Reducing resource utilisation

Reviewer: Changing this after I read Migration tests.

It should be

## Acceptance tests

## Migration tests

## Reduce resource utilisation

Author: created Shared resources section after test types sections

  - As the project is shared for all acceptance tests for a resource, sometimes tests can affect each other if they're using global resources to the project (e.g. network peering, maintenance window or LDAP config). In that case:
    - Run the tests in serial (`resource.Test` instead of `resource.ParallelTest`) if the tests are fast and saving resources is prefered.
    - Don’t use `ProjectIDExecution` and create a project for each test if a faster test execution is prefered even if more resources are needed.

> - Main way to reduce use of clusters is `ClusterNameExecution`. This function returns the name of a cluster that is created for the current execution of tests for a resource. Similar precautions to project reuse must be taken here. If a global resource to cluster is being tested (e.g. cluster global config) then it's prefered to run tests in serial or create their own clusters.

Reviewer 4: This function returns the `projectID` and the `clusterName`

Author: added, thx

> - Plural data sources can be challeging to test when tests run in parallel or they share projects and/or clusters. In that case:

Reviewer 4: typo: challenging

Author: thx! changed

>   - Don't check for a specific total count as other tests can also create resources. As an example you can check that there are results using `acc.IntGreatThan(0)`.

Reviewer: why not checking for the specific names ?

Author: isn't it covered here?

- Don't assume results are in a certain order, use functions like `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemNestedAttrs` or `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemAttr`.

or do you mean something else?

Reviewer: it's a nit, but it seems the guideline says that the valid alternative to check a specific count is to do `acc.IntGreatThan(0)`, which is not ideal IMO since it can still hide a bug that e.g. not all resources were created.
I would just suggest to rephrase that:

* Plural data sources can be challenging to test when tests run in parallel or they share projects and/or clusters. In that case use functions like `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemNestedAttrs` or `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemAttr`
  * Avoid checking for a specific total count as other tests can also create resources.
  * Don't assume results are in a certain order.

Author: changed, thx

>   - Don't assume results are in a certain order, use functions like `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemNestedAttrs` or `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemAttr`.

Reviewer 4: maybe worth mentioning: `acc.AddAttrChecks` and `acc.AddAttrSetChecks`

Author: mention added, thx!

## Migration tests

> - Migration tests are also acceptance tests so most of the info above also applies here, e.g. use of `ProjectIDExecution` or `ClusterNameExecution`.

Reviewer 3: nit: Instead of this mention, could we have the points related to Shared resources in a separate section and make a small mentions that it applies for both acceptance and migration tests?

Reviewer: ah +1 to this, just read the comment

Author: thx, extracted to its own section

> - Migration tests are also acceptance tests so most of the info above also applies here, e.g. use of `ProjectIDExecution` or `ClusterNameExecution`.

Reviewer: with the suggestion of restructuring, this bullet point can go away

> 
> ## Testing Best Practices
> 
> ### Types of test

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Testing Best Practices

## Types of test
```
a11y preserve the title order and don't skip levels

Author: i see, thanks, i was following the other contributing files.    changed, will change the other files in a different PR

- Unit tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to tests that [validate a resource schema](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/handling-data/schemas#unit-testing). That is done automatically [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/provider/provider_test.go) for all resources and data sources using Terraform Framework Plugin. Additionally, we have general unit testing for testing a resource or unit without calling external systems like MongoDB Atlas.
- Acceptance (acc) tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to the use of real Terraform configurations to exercise the code in plan, apply, refresh, and destroy life cycles (real infrastructure resources are created as part of the test), more info [here](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/testing/acceptance-tests).
- Migration (mig) tests: These tests are designed to ensure that after an upgrade to a new Atlas provider version, user configs do not result in unexpected plan changes, more info [here](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/migrating/testing). Migration tests are a subset of Acceptance tests.

## File structure

> - A resource and associated data sources are implemented in a folder that is also a Go package, e.g. `advancedcluster` implementation is in [`internal/service/advancedcluster`](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/internal/service/advancedcluster)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A resource and associated data sources are implemented in a folder that is also a Go package, e.g. `advancedcluster` implementation is in [`internal/service/advancedcluster`](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/f3ff5bb678c1b07c16cc467471f483e483565427/internal/service/advancedcluster)
```

Reviewer: feel free to discard if there was a rationale for non using permalink, I think it's better though

Author: not a strong opinion, for links that are that not probably going to change like this one (resource folder) i might use master, and from that link you can navigate through the latest advanced_cluster code

Author: similar for main_test.go, if the link to that file gets broken it's really because we've changed the convention and we should have updated the doc

Author: thanks @gssbzn for all your comments.  as discussed offline i'll merge the PR

- We enforce "black box" testing, tests must be in a separate "_test" package, e.g. `advancedcluster` tests are in `advancedcluster_test` package.
- Acceptance and general unit tests are in corresponding  `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.  If business logic is extracted into a separate file, unit testing for that logic will be including in its associated `_test.go` file, e.g. [state_transition_search_deployment_test.go](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/66c44e62c9afe04ffe8be0dbccaec682bab830e6/internal/service/searchdeployment/state_transition_search_deployment_test.go).
- Migration tests are in `_migration_test.go` files.

> - All resource folders must have a `main_test.go` file to handle resource reuse lifecycle, e.g. [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/advancedcluster/main_test.go).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All resource folders must have a `main_test.go` file to handle resource reuse lifecycle, e.g. [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/f3ff5bb678c1b07c16cc467471f483e483565427/internal/service/advancedcluster/main_test.go).
```

Author: yes, we'll definitely update it more times

# Testing Best Practices

## Types of test

> - Unit tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to tests that [validate a resource schema](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/handling-data/schemas#unit-testing). That is done automatically [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/provider/provider_test.go) for all resources and data sources using Terraform Framework Plugin. Additionally, we have general unit testing for testing a resource or unit without calling the external systems like the Atlas Go SDK.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Unit tests: In Terraform terminology they refer to tests that [validate a resource schema](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/handling-data/schemas#unit-testing). That is done automatically [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/provider/provider_test.go) for all resources and data sources using [Terraform Framework Plugin](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework). 
Additionally, we have general unit tests for testing a resource or unit without calling the external systems like the Atlas Go SDK.
```

Reviewer 5: not sure what
>unit without calling the external systems like the Atlas Go SDK.

means

Author: rephrased to: without calling external systems like MongoDB Atlas.

> - [Acceptance (acc) tests](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/testing/acceptance-tests): In Terraform terminology they refer to the use of real Terraform configurations to exercise the code in plan, apply, refresh, and destroy life cycles (real infrastructure resources are created as part of the test).

Reviewer 5: feels a bit weird these two the link is the heading but unit is in the body

Author: changed, thx

- [Migration (mig) tests](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/migrating/testing): These tests are designed to ensure that after an upgrade to a new Atlas provider version, user configs do not result in unexpected plan changes. Migration tests are a subset of Acceptance tests.

> ## File structure

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Test Organization
```

> - A resource and associated data sources are implemented in a folder that is also a Go folder, e.g. `advancedcluster` implementation is in [`internal/service/advancedcluster`](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/tree/master/internal/service/advancedcluster)

Reviewer 5: what's a go folder? you mean a go package?

Author: oops, changed, thx

- Acceptances tests are in corresponding `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.

> - General unit tests are in corresponding  `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.  If business logic is extracted into a separate file, unit testing for that logic will be including in its associated `_test.go` file (e.g. [state_transition_search_deployment_test.go](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/searchdeployment/state_transition_search_deployment_test.go)).

Reviewer 5: sounds to me everything is in the `_test.go` file, I would inverts the description to describe what goes in a test file

Author: restructured, thx

> - General unit tests are in corresponding  `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.  If business logic is extracted into a separate file, unit testing for that logic will be including in its associated `_test.go` file (e.g. [state_transition_search_deployment_test.go](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/searchdeployment/state_transition_search_deployment_test.go)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- General unit tests are in corresponding  `_test.go` file as the resource or data source source file.  If business logic is extracted into a separate file, unit testing for that logic will be including in its associated `_test.go` file (e.g. [state_transition_search_deployment_test.go](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/66c44e62c9afe04ffe8be0dbccaec682bab830e6/internal/service/searchdeployment/state_transition_search_deployment_test.go)).
```

Author: changed, thx

> - Tests are not in the same package as the code it tests, e.g. `advancedcluster` tests are in `advancedcluster_test` package so coupling is minimized.

Reviewer 5: please enable `testpackage` in the linter if this is something you plan to enforce 
```suggestion
- We enforce "black box" testing, test should be in a separate "_test" package, for example:  `advancedcluster` tests are in `advancedcluster_test` package.
```

Reviewer 5: I would move these also above since I suppose applies for all types of tests

Author: thx, i'll add testpackage in a different PR

Author: taken "black box" concept and moving up

- Migration tests are in `_migration_test.go` files.
- All resource folders must have a `main_test.go` file to handle resource reuse lifecycle, e.g. [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/advancedcluster/main_test.go).

> - Helper methods must have their own tests, e.g. `common_advanced_cluster_test.go` has tests for `common_advanced_cluster.go`.

Reviewer 5: this covers two things that are not really related, should helper methods have a dedicated file? why? go doesn't care a package can be all a single file and organization is subjective. Then there's the actual method having tests which I find a bit contradictory with blackbox testing, I would expect helper methods to be unexported and if you enforce black box testing then untested

Reviewer 5: @lantoli

Author: "helper methods" is probably not the best name for what we mean here. They are functions (for example flatteners and expander to go from/to TF schema / Atlas SDK). They're normally used across the resource, data source and plural data source so it makes sense that they are not in the resource file for instance.     also some might even be used from other resources.

Author: @gssbzn let me know it's better now: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/2132/commits/feae31a362deef3c76f7134d3e258eea962115eb

- `internal/testutils/acc` contains helper test functions for Acceptance tests.

> - `internal/testutils/mig` contains helper test functions specifically for Migration tests.

Reviewer 5: not for these PR but let's avoid utils in package names please

Author: i know, the problem is that test was confusing  in this context because it doesn't have tests, and i wanted to group in a parent to acc, mig (and replay). any suggestion to improve this package name?

Author: it'd be similar to httptest in Go library but i couldn´t find a good name for the "http" part

- `internal/testutils/replay` contains helper test functions for [Hoverfly](https://docs.hoverfly.io/en/latest/). Hoverfly is used to capture and replay HTTP traffic with Atlas Cloud.

> ## Unit tests

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Mocking
```

Author: although i only talk about mocking I use ## Unit tests  as we also use sections for acc and mig tests

- Unit tests must not create Terraform resources or use external systems like [Atlas Go SDK](https://github.com/mongodb/atlas-sdk-go).
- Mock of specific interfaces like `client.ProjectsApi` is prefered to use the whole `client`.
- [Testify Mock](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/mock) is used for test doubles.
- Altlas Go SDK mocked interfaces are generated in [mockadmin](https://github.com/mongodb/atlas-sdk-go/tree/main/mockadmin) package using [Mockery](https://github.com/vektra/mockery).

## Acceptance tests

- There must be at least one `basic acceptance test` for each resource.

> - `Basic import tests` are done as the last step in the `basic acceptance tests`, not as a different test. Exceptions apply for more specific import tests, e.g. testing with incorrect IDs. [Import tests](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/sdkv2/resources/import#resource-acceptance-testing-implementation) verify that the [Terraform Import](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/import) functionality is working fine.

Reviewer 5: what makes them "basic"?
![basic](https://media.giphy.com/media/v1.Y2lkPTc5MGI3NjExbWU3dHI1enB1am5laHludjJkOGM1emphanplMWZkNTdzZmlyajJzcSZlcD12MV9pbnRlcm5hbF9naWZfYnlfaWQmY3Q9Zw/l1KdbHUPe27GQsJH2/giphy.gif)

Author: ha ha, it's how we call it.   i've added this clarification:  They test the happy path with minimum resource configuration, and a link to an example

> - Data sources are tested in the same tests as the resources. There are no separate files or tests for data sources as a resource must typically be created. (There are very few exceptions to this, e.g. when there is only data sources but not resource)

Reviewer 5: this seems to belong to test organization

Author: also atlas_user for example doesn't have resource

- Helper functions such as `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemNestedAttrs` or `resource.TestCheckTypeSetElemAttr` can be used to check resource and data source attributes more easily.

## Migration tests

- There must be at least one `basic migration test` for each resource that leverages on the `basic acceptance tests` using helper test functions such as `CreateAndRunTest`.

## Local development

> These enviroment variables can be used in local to speed up development process.

Reviewer 5: local development or testing?

Author: changed, thx

Enviroment Variable | Description
--- | ---
`MONGODB_ATLAS_PROJECT_ID` | Re-use an existing project reducing test run duration for resources supporting this variable
`MONGODB_ATLAS_CLUSTER_NAME` | Re-use an existing cluster reducing significantly test run duration for resources supporting this variable
`REPLAY_MODE` | Use [Hoverfly](https://docs.hoverfly.io/en/latest/), more info about possible variable values [here](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/contributing/development-setup.md#replaying-http-requests-with-hoverfly)

## Shared resources

Acceptance and migration tests can reuse projects and clusters in order to be more efficient in resource utilization.

> - A project can be reused using `ProjectIDExecution`. It returns the ID of a project that is created for the current execution of tests for a resource.

Reviewer 5: reading usage seems to be 
```suggestion
- A project can be reused using `acc.ProjectIDExecution(t)`. It returns the ID of a project that is created for the current execution of tests for a resource.
```
But I would suggest this may be better explained with a code block that includes the imports and comments on all the bits needed,

Author: adding example
